---
layout: post
title: Blog Post 1 - Visualization of NOAA Climate Data
---

This blog post will explain how to create a database and visualize quantitative data from this database with Python using `sqlite3`. 

## §1. Creating the Database

First, we must create the database containing information about the NOAA Climate. 


## §2. Write a Query Function

Write a function called `query_climate_database()` which accepts four arguments: 

- `country`, a string giving the name of a country for which data should be returned. 
- `year_begin` and `year_end`, two integers giving the earliest and latest years for which should be returned. 
- `month`, an integer giving the month of the year for which should be returned. 

The return value of `query_climate_database()` is a Pandas dataframe of temperature readings for the specified country, in the specified date range, in the specified month of the year. This dataframe should have columns for: 

- The station name.
- The latitude of the station. 
- The longitude of the station. 
- The name of the country in which the station is located.
- The year in which the reading was taken. 
- The month in which the reading was taken. 
- The average temperature at the specified station during the specified year and month. (*Note: the temperatures in the raw data are already averages by month, so you don't have to do any aggregation at this stage.*)


## §3. Create a Geographic Scatter Function for Yearly Temperature Increases



### §4. Create Two More Interesting Figures

Create at least two more complex and interesting interactive data visualizations using the same data set. In each case, you should construct your visualization from data obtained by querying the database that you created in §1. The code to construct each visualization should be wrapped in functions, such that a user could create visualizations for different parts of the data by calling these functions with different arguments. 

Alongside the plots, you should clearly state a question that the plot addresses, similar to the question that we posed in §3. The questions for your two additional plots should be meaningfully different from each other and from the §3 question. You will likely want to define different query functions for extracting data for these new visualizations.  

It is not necessary to create *geographic* plots for this part. Scatterplots, histograms, and line plots (among other choices) are all appropriate. Please make sure that they are complex, engaging, professional, and targeted to the questions you posed. In other words, *push yourself!* Don't hesitate to ask your peers or talk to me if you're having trouble coming up with questions or identifying plots that might be suitable for addressing those questions. 




