---
layout: post
title: Blog Post 0 - Penguin Data Visualization
---

This blog post will explain how to visualize quantitative data through a scatterplot using Python, specifically using `pandas` and `matplotlib`. 

## Gathering Data

First, let us gather the data about the Palmer Penguins into a dataset that we can manipulate using Python. To do so, we will use the `pandas` module. The method `read_csv` from `pandas` reads a csv file into a `pandas` DataFrame. This will allow us to gather the data so that we can display certain parts of it. This method can work using a website URL that contains the data you want. The following code executes this by reading the Palmer Penguin data from a website containing it: 

```python
import pandas as pd
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilChodrow/PIC16B/master/datasets/palmer_penguins.csv"
penguins = pd.read_csv(url)
```

## Specifying the Categories

Now, we have all the data from the original data set about the Palmer Penguins! To visualize some of the quantitative data on a scatterplot, we need to specify which categories we want to graph. For this example, I will be graphing the body mass (g) of each penguin against its bill length (mm). First, let us create a new DataFrame that one has the following columns of data: species, body mass, and bill length. In the original DataFrame  `penguins`, these columns are called `Species`, `Body Mass (g)`, and `Culmen Length (mm)`. So, we can create a new DataFrame that specifically contains the information in these columns from `penguins` like so: 

```python
bill_mass = penguins[["Species","Body Mass (g)", "Culmen Length (mm)"]]
```

I included the species of each penguin as well so that we can colorcode the graphed data based on species. To categorize the data in this way, we can create Boolean masks for the DataFrame which return `True` if a specific penguin matches the indicated species. There are three total penguin species at the Palmer Station: Adélie, Gentoo, and Chinstrap. In the data set, they are stylized as the following: `'Adelie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae)'`, `'Chinstrap penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica)'`, and `'Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua)'`. Let us create an array of booleans that return `True` when it satisfies the mask operator. In this case, we want to check if the species name of each penguin in the DataFrame matches one of the three species. So, we will create three different masks, one for each species, using the following code:

```python
is_adelie = bill_mass['Species'] == 'Adelie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae)'
is_chinstrap = bill_mass['Species'] == 'Chinstrap penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica)'
is_gentoo = bill_mass['Species'] == 'Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua)'
```

- bulleted 
- lists
    1. numbered 
    2. lists
    
$$f(x) = e^x$$

Talking about Python code:

```python
import pandas as pd
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilChodrow/PIC16B/master/datasets/palmer_penguins.csv"
penguins = read_csv(url)
```

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}
<div class="got-help">
I learned something really cool from my peer feedback! 

```python
def f(x):
    """
    a cool function that multiplies an input by 3
    """
    return 3*x
```
</div>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}
<div class="gave-help">
I gave one of my peers a cool suggestion! 
</div>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}
